# Google's Data Mining and Collection: A Case of Intrusion or Benefits?
In this document, I discuss Google's collection and use of consumer data. The two articles highlight two different aspects of this practice: a potential breach and intrusion of privacy of the user vs. the benefits to the user of allowing Google to mine their data.

## Article 1
The article ["Google Data Collection Is More Extensive and Intrusive Than You Ever Imagined"](https://www.cpomagazine.com/data-privacy/google-data-collection-is-more-extensive-and-intrusive-than-you-ever-imagined/), published by the CPO magazine, raises questions about Google's data collection practices based on a report from Vanderbilt University and Digital Content Next. The article presents the view that Google acts on the model of surveillance capitalism, where tracking user behaviours and interests allows it to tailor advertisements towards specific users. Thus, Google is able to generate a substantial amount of revenue (86% of it's total revenue) through advertisements. While Google continues to ensure users of its products and services that their data is kept private, the data collection practices seem to suggest otherwise. <br>
One striking feature of the data collected is location history of users, forming 35% of all the data Google gets from users. Not only does location tracking happen on a high frequency, it also seems to be unavoidable. Even when users seem to have blocked location history, Google still passively collects this information with astounding precision, all the while making it virtually impossible - or at least very complicated - to stop Google from collecting this information. The issue becomes further complicated when this data is shared by Google to allow targeting of advertisements of services to specific interests of users.  <br>
While Google denies the claims of generating user-specific profiles from the data it tracks, mines, and stores, the access to substantial amounts of private and personal data makes abuse and breach of privacy a very likely scenario. Here the scenario of public comes into play where there would be increased calls for transperancy, controlled access to user data by Google, and further regulations to ensure that user privacy is protected at all times in the financially driven motives and practices of a Big Tech company like Google. <br>
From a personal perspective, and basing it off the analysis of the articles above, it does seem that Big Tech companies like Google have a huge motive to collect and use user data. On the other hand, being a user of Google's products and services myself, it also becomes a scary territory where the idea of some third-party having a lot of private information about you raises concerns. Not only does the use of this data by Google tread on a very complex territory, but also the potential of data breach, leak, or manipulation for other motives (which has been another topic of discussion recently), is where regulation becomes necessary. However, from Google's perspective they would not want to 'give up' on such a powerful revenue generating tool so easily. Thus, the Data Mining issue becomes very interesting with multiple stakeholders, and would need a very thorough examination to eventually come to some acceptable solution for all the different parties involved.

## Article 2
While the article in CPO magazine discusses the many different possibilities of intrusion of privacy that Google's Data mining and collection practices can lead to, Infosecurity magazine's ["The Four Benefits of Data Mining: Google's Side of the Data Story"](https://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/next-gen-infosec/four-benefits-data-mining-google/) presents an opposing viewpoint to this topic. The article discusses different angles to the potential benefits of Data Mining by Google, including those to the user directly, the wider community, and Google. <br>
The article recognizes that companies like Google get access to a large amount of user data whenever their services are utilized by someone, and that creating user-specific profiles and sharing them for advertisement targeting does occur. However, it presents a different angle to look at this operation involving data instead of considering it an intrusion on privacy. The first benefit is that your phone - or any device for that sake - becomes a lot more useful. Relating this to personal experience, I do agree that understanding and analyzing user behaviour and interests through the collected data allows Google to create tailored experiences for someone using its products and services. This certainly provides convenience in use of these products and services, such as the personalization provided by virtual assistants like Google Assistant (or other similar ones like Samsung's Bixby or Amazon's Alexa). These methods of using data, the article argues, adds value and usefulness to the product's use. <br>
Further, another interesting point made by the article is that of the cost of using such products and services. While in today's world everything seems to come with an associated price tag, Google's broad range of services and products are either free or considerably cheaper. Thus, you might want to look at your data as a new sort of currency through which transactions happen when Google collects your data. Essentially, the user provides Google with their data in return for utilizing Google's product and service portfolio. Google being a firm with financial motives as well, in turn, can utilize this data to generate revenue. Thus, in some sense, this mode of transaction through data mining and collection provides the best of both worlds to the user and to Google. The article even steps further to portray this transaction through data as a form of charity since by collecting user data, Google is able to improve its products, their cost, and the accessibility of these products to disadvantaged groups of people across the world.
Lastly, the article suggests that Google might not be to blame for everything. Eventually, all the control of their personal data still remains with the user through the increasing privacy features. Further, even though providing data to access Google's services seems unavoidable in today's world, it is eventually the user who has agreed to all the privacy policies (though I might want to argue that those policies are very complicated for a large majority of users who have no choice but to accept these without even understanding what they entail). <br>
Quite interestingly, and along the lines I was thinking, despite discussing all these potential benefits of allowing Google to continue their practices of Data Mining and Collection, the article does agree that we still might not be able to trust Google, and that despite all the privacy features, the profit making motive necessitates further regulation around how this data is collected and utilized. <br>
While the convenience brought about by Google's services based on user data collection, along with other potential benefits do form a strong argument to augment this practice, in my opinion and after consideration of the arguments presented in Article 1, it still does not form a basis to provide a leeway to Google for practices that might make users feel unsafe or intrudes their privacy. To this end, further stronger regulations might be necessary, along with a tussle between the common user and the highly motivated Big Tech companies like Google.